---
layout: post
title: Accountability is collective or non-existant. 
published: true
tags: hot_take thoughts blog
---

# Why do we keep on getting narcisists running things? 
Oddly as we move up in responsibilties we experience less oversight, though our impact and potential to really screw things up is higher. Think about the CEO of a large fastfood chain and think of the janitor cleaning the toilets. One has a sign in sheet and can be let go when the vibes feel right. It's not the one in the suit. Why do we take this a granted? And why do we seem to think of it as natural. I've been delving into ancient Chinese and Roman history (I do think about it a lot)  and a runing theme is a cycle of good and bad emperors. It seems comical to me that plenty smart philosophers of those times couldn't get past the idea that they needed some kind of dude who wielded absolute power. Times can be exquisite if you get marcus arelius but usually you get a Nero. Accountablity is annoying, watching the news is exhausting, showing up to the local city council or HOA to call out petty corruption is a drag. The HOA is beautiful in theory but in practice seems to be where narcissist who were smart enough to get on the school board go to act out their condition. Note I understand narcissism to be a medical condition, but until we manage narcissism like they do in Aldous Huxley's Island they at least need to be kept away from any buttons. I think we are doomed to repeat bad emperor cycles until we do see holding groups and those in authority accountable like we see throwing our litter in the correct waste bin. Because not even courts given the title supreme will do it for you. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rlg-MXR5amQ?si=seiQjneoe-lDcSQ5" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>